Peter Dale Scott who's with me today has
just finished writing a book the war
conspiracy which is just about to be
published on the 15th of this month and
it's subtitled the secret road to the
second Indochina war and it's an account
of many of the intrigues that have led
to not only the Vietnam War but other
wars and Indochina other parts of that
war and he touches on the Korean War and
it is a one of the first in-depth
studies of many of the connections both
inside the government to different
government agencies and to business that
are involved in the causes of the wars
in Laos and and in Vietnam Peter has
your view of what the causes of the
Vietnam War changed as you've written
this book over the last three years
well it's certainly broadened and opened
out I began by being interested in
intelligence agencies and in what I
thought was a dangerous centralization
of power in that you have not only the
power to report on what's happening out
there but also through operations the
the power actually to generate political
actions out there to topple governments
through coup d'etat and on occasion to
foment guerrilla wars in remote areas
like northeastern Laos and so on so that
was my focus at the beginning was to
look at intelligence operations
particularly on the operations side
and since then I was very interested in
the Tonkin Gulf incident for example
strictly the book grew out of a depth in
in-depth study of the Tonkin Gulf
incident where you had a destroyer on an
intelligence mission Lee the Maddox you
had 34a operations these South
Vietnamese Swift boats which were
attacking the islands of North Vietnam
at the same time you had unmarked planes
flying in air America planes flying in
from Laos or Thailand bombed villages in
that area of North Vietnam at the same
time all of this was intelligence and
then finally the the importance of the
radio intercepts which were used to
convince the Washington administration
that a second Tonkin Gulf in
and had in fact occurred you know that
this is quite a dispute as to whether
there really was a second Tonkin Gulf
incident which was the occasion for the
first bombing of North Vietnam and I
think senator Fulbright is now concluded
there wasn't a second talking Gulf
incident and yet you had these radio
intercepts from the intelligence
personnel which proved that there was a
second incident so that was the kind of
problem that I was interested in at the
beginning but it's such a complex story
and I apologize to the reader for the
complexity of the story that you find it
opening out to involve economic
interests the in the remnants of the
Guam and Don Chiang kai-shek's sort of
there's not so much within Taiwan but
the connections he had with or overseas
tries Chinese communities throughout
Southeast Asia and so I think one of the
things that intrigued me most about the
book was the picture of the war
conspiracy as at least some of the time
a conspiracy by some elements of
government against others yes I believe
I believe that is the case and the the
is it accurate to say do you think that
not only are the intelligence activities
the trigger but things are so sensitive
the content of one radio telegram can
determine whether something is an attack
or a defensive reaction Thayer's in the
talking Gulf Resolution that that
intelligence really plays a balanced
role that's not quite the right word for
it
yes and that therefore their contact as
you document with air America with with
narcotics with the gomen thing are are
much more important than the weight of
anyone injured corporate LOC might
suggest because of the very borderline
position that intelligence plays yes I
would add to that that I think they're
particularly important at which you
might call critical periods you reach a
point where the government is at an
impasse and there you have a faction and
incidentally you get often have
intelligence people in both factions not
all intelligence operators are Hawks
there but that's not the conclusion of
my book but you have an impasse in the
government we you know say that the the
government of South Vietnam is not
working it's maybe about to fall there
are some people whose
we've got to escalate to reassure the
people in Saigon that we're serious you
also have some other people and these
may include some intelligence people who
are saying it's time to cut our losses
and and find out somebody to get out of
there and it's in these moments of
impasse where the government is at
loggerheads with itself that the control
over information becomes the control
over policy how was that operative in
the Tonkin Gulf situation well I think
it was operative really from the middle
of 1963 right through to early 65 in
that there was very there was still
resistance in Washington to the idea of
bombing North Vietnam particularly the
idea of bombing North Vietnam without
any visible provocation in particularly
of course in an election year that was
Johnson was all set to run as the peace
candidate in 1964 so it's understandable
that all kinds of people were reluctant
to bomb North Vietnam at that time and I
think that the administration was pushed
into bombing North Vietnam by the what
are the soil of information before and
also the control of information after
the alleged what are the forces that
that did that and how did they operate
well my what I'm trying to do in the
book is not so much to identify the
criminal as to demonstrate the existence
of the crime but there are many people
who will believe that the Tonkin Gulf
thing was a mess that it was confused
that it was they'll even concede that
there was no second Tonkin Gulf incident
but they'll there's a whole book written
this way that suggests it was an
unfortunate accident and proves the
difficulty of controlling the massive
Pentagon and I suggest suggesting that
it was no accident
but you're asking me to identify who the
man oh wow oh I didn't mean it in that
sense I was thinking of for instance you
argue in the in the book that two of the
cables which were crucial cables were in
fact not relevant to the second Gulf of
Tonkin incident they were in some way
held over from the first is that that's
true well that's not my discovery that's
from a very useful book by Anthony
Austin call the president
war and he I think shows pretty
conclusively in that book that the
intercepts that were used to force the
government to retaliate to the second
talking golf incident were in fact they
they they were in a sense true except
that they were information not about the
second incident on August 4th but about
the first incident on August 2nd and to
which it had already been decided not to
have a retaliatory right yes actually no
it is not and that these well I would
die if you're at you know we're asking
who done it so to speak I am very
interested that radio intercept
information a special kind of intercept
activity was the responsibility of the
Army Security Agency in South Vietnam we
know that from the Pentagon Papers and
when when we see that radio intercepts
played a vital and very dubious role not
only in the Tonkin Gulf incidents but
also in other episodes the Cambodia
invasion for example in 1970 you had
another of these impasses over Cambodia
and there were people arguing including
some intelligence people arguing very
strongly that there was no need for the
United States to go into Cambodia and in
fact the issue was where where the whole
sort of Viet Cong apparatus had its
headquarters in me and the army was
claiming that there was a concrete
Bastion sort of Pentagon building for
the other side in Cambodia and that some
of the civilians were arguing that there
was no such thing that that just was a
radical misunderstanding of how the NLF
operates and I believe the civilians
were right in this and the New York
Times actually printed a map in April
1970 proving that whatever headquarters
there was was not in Cambodia but was in
South Vietnam and those people were over
this is what I call an intelligence
battle where you have intelligence
operators each trying to influence
policy by presenting their version of
effects and the civilians were overruled
by the hard evidence that came from the
Joint Chiefs of Staff in the form of
radio intercepts that prove
that there was this kind of fortress
somewhere in Cambodian of course the
American troops where Dinh went right to
where the the army claimed the fortress
was and it turned out not to exist so
once again you had the hard evidence in
the form of intercept but but no current
no no correlative to it in reality in in
the situations like the Tonkin Gulf
thing what what's the interest of
whoever is is on the side of provocation
in that day in that case seems to me you
suggest that that has to do a lot with
Laos say at the time of Tonkin oh yes
and and also with the the long-standing
interest of air America and the CIA and
Laos could can you explain that more but
it's hard it's very hard to do that in
terms of one single incident but in
terms of the whole of 1964 it was it
served the interests of many different
factions not all of them American we
must remember for example that the Guam
and Don was still thinking and still
publicly talking about invading mainland
China in fact the Kuomintang said I
think rid that 19's free they said for
some years in 1963 three would be the
crucial year and we might mention about
the Tonkin Gulf incidents for example
that there were nationalists Chinese on
those little patrol boats that I was
talking about there may have been more
Chinese than Vietnamese for all I know
that it may well have been Chinese
pilots that flew the air America planes
that bombed the villages it may even
have been I here I'm only speculating
the other two things are more
corroborate more corroborated but it may
be that the Americans were using Chinese
personnel to translate from Vietnamese
for them because there was a great
shortage of experts in the Vietnamese
languages for the radio intercepts so
that they had a stake there obviously I
have to remember this the the powerful
financial influences in Vientiane Laos
for example are mostly Chinese that that
the the Asian
capitalist population of Saigon is
mostly Chinese and so on in the district
and something like this is true also in
Bangkok and Singapore does the CIA have
getting involved with I mean what's
there what's the route well we go back
to the 50s when America you know that
the McCarthy era and America had
accommodated to the loss of mainland
China but this produced among liberals
almost more than among conservatives the
the determination to make a stand in
Southeast Asia on the mainland and that
meant
unfortunately working with very
reactionary elements Lee the only sort
of visible opposition at that time that
they could work with was the status quo
which was quite corrupt which was
thoroughly sort of intermingled with
opium in that area the French had relied
on the sort of de facto power networks
which were set up by the narcotics trade
in opium and the the CIA inherited this
and took it over and and I argue in my
chapter on heroin not only took it over
but actually helped build it up that the
the source of opium from mainland China
had been cut off by the the Communists
you had a worldwide opium Network
reaching to America reaching to
Chinatown Tong's here right here in
America secret societies but the the the
opium had been cut off and this was of
course crisis to the opium industry and
the the the CIA allowed its resources to
be used via its airline its quote
private airline in in Southeast Asia we
call it Air America today it was called
civil air transport in those days it's
the the its general Chennault airline
that he set up after world war ii they
allowed that airline which had with 60%
controlled by the nationalist Chinese
and was based in Taiwan and they allowed
it to fly in supplies and even cash CIA
cash to the opium growers and traders
the the so-called woman dying remnants
in northern Thailand and Burma what did
the CIA get out of it well it out of it
a network which which reached through
the whole of Southeast Asia it
it got out of it particularly the early
fifties reinforcements for the elements
in Malaya that were putting down the
insurrection there because these were
mostly so-called triads or secret
societies Chinese overseas Chinese with
links to the Guam and on who were
actually hired as private armies by the
mine owners and in Malaya to put down
the insurrection there and the British
started off by trying to stamp out
narcotics in Malaya but they found that
this meant crushing the secret societies
and is a very scholarly book points out
this created a vacuum which the
Communists moved into so the British
learnt that they had to hold off from
this and meanwhile the the CIA
indirectly but I think quite consciously
we're allowing their resources to be
used to build it up and have to remember
that opium was reaching this country in
the form of heroin so that they're
essentially they were rather callously
trading an increase in heroin youth
throughout the world for right-wing
political support were there rollback
strategy in Southeast Asia I mean is
that a containment or role I think some
of them work as robots there's a more
right-wing picture of the CIA then I
certainly have in general I think of
them well I really don't want I think
that it's very easy to to oversimplify
what I'm saying about the CIA there I
think there were yes particularly in the
Far East they a lot of them were
right-wing and set up links with the
extreme right-wing particularly in the
form of a of a woman dung apparatus
which incident I think also had links to
the right-wing Galen apparatus in
Germany which the the CIA also worked
with however the CIA also contained
liberals and we must remember that some
of those OSS veterans you know had
worked with Ho Chi Minh and so on and
particularly when when Lansdale went out
to Indochina for example in 1955 I'm
just trying to be fair here he did one
of the first things he did was try to
crush the the the opium Network incheol
on the Chinese suburb of Saigon which
the French intelligence had used as a
kind of control mechanism for for
Indochina
and the Lansdale won the battle in 1955
but I think he lost the war because it
three or four years later it was
necessary for the GM regime to restore
its links with that network in order to
survive and that's what I it is said I'm
making you know unprovable charges here
but it frequently it has been claimed
that madam knew was involved in that
that madam key was involved in that and
and most and many top-level people in
the present Saigon administration in
general cameras brother do you think
that that right-wing element in the CIA
or that with ties to the going gang into
narcotics traffic continues today to
operator we're talking about a period
64 at Tonkin which is now seven years
ago eight years ago it's it's hard for
me to analyze it that way because I just
don't have the evidence but what I would
say is that certain devices which were
perfected over the years for generating
incidents for generating cooze for
generating a kind of crisis to which the
American government had to respond
because the sort of intelligence
personnel had deliberately made a mess
that then the military had to come in
and and deal with those devices are
still practiced and I suppose I'll give
you two very recent instances both
relate to my book well the first one
would be Cambodia you remember there was
a coup in Cambodia which preceded the
invasion and many people said what
madness this coup was because the only
sort of possible stable government there
was which was that of Prince Norodom C&O
could now been overthrown and then the
more right-wing Yellen was right no no
and some knocked Tang who is now the
premier and who is the man with the long
distinct stew the CIA in that area and a
man whose efforts to overthrow and siano
could been subsidized by the CIA for
four years and this new sort of very
weak government went right out and sort
of attacked the
the troops of the NLF that had taken
refuge in longley eastern border of
cambodian people said what madness how
insane because they can't possibly win
against those people but of course it
wasn't madness it wasn't insane it was a
way of generating a crisis which would
force the Americans to intervene to to
back them up and this has been tried so
many times and has worked so many times
that it was perfectly rational for the
Cambodians to expect that it would work
in the case of Cambodia in 1970 and then
most recently there's been this talk
about general lavell who was flying
these unauthorized attacks against North
Vietnam which were then quite falsely
called protective reaction raids and
just that was I think was just last week
Jack Anderson ran a column in which he
said it's not the first time this has
happened that something very like this
he first of all points out that it was
general Lavelle was doing this in the
context of Kissinger's efforts to make
some kind of secret deal with the
Vietnamese in Paris and that it was just
like in 1967 when oberek and Markovic
who were two friends of Kissinger were
on a secret mission to Vietnam and the
Joint Chiefs or their or think pack
dumped a sort of record number of bombs
all around Hanoi while they were doing
this I know that meant even saving up
all their authorizations to bomb didn't
write I could use them all at once and I
have a whole chapter about this in my
book of course I didn't know about the
general Lavelle thing I wrote it before
the general Lovell episode in fact but
precisely what Jack Anderson is talking
about in 1967 I have a whole chapter
about how we not only bombed Hanoi but
actually bombed Soviet ships in Haiphong
Harbor bombed Chinese ships and that
these attacks on Soviet and Chinese
shipping occurred regularly at times
when there were secret peaceful
negotiations going on with the ladies do
they fail to occur when there weren't
secret negotiations just fantastic that
even when you have a poll
Peace Initiative that the Polish ship
gets attacked I mean that's the degree
of refinement to which this really
hideous kind of thing was going on I
can't prove that that was the intention
but I can draw a little chart and I have
which is two pages long of of attacks on
shipping which correlate very closely
with the peace initiatives at the time
do can I say one more word about that
and that is that although we didn't know
it at the time there were periods when
Haiphong Harbor was off-limits because
of the sensitive peace negotiations and
you find that the the greatest number of
attacks on shipping are precisely at
times when Hanoi and Haiphong have being
put secretly off limits it seems to me
we're talking about a series not just
one more conspiracy in the narrow sense
but many different ones I mean we've
just talked of two of one of elements of
the CIA conspiring against all it a
syndrome syndrome right yes wiring
against the military here we're talking
about the Joint Chiefs of Staff
perhaps conspiring against Henry
Kissinger I mean or yes I think but I
think remember it's not quite that
disparate because I think the intention
of a lot of the right CIA people was
precisely to elevate out of a covert
operation into a military operation so
that their interests and those of the
military did Cowen's well they may have
coincided I just meant that they were
not necessarily in communication with
each other it's a release if they were
you weren't you weren't talking about I
can't see that I can only see the
outward manifestations well it seems to
me I have a in terms of the present
situation is it there's obviously the
struggle continuing is general de Velde
actions indicate between the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and the withdrawal
policy considerations a and and Nixon
seems more to be connected to kiss dear
I mean it would heart be hardest I think
in an election year the presidents are
usually on the side of the negotiators
yes and who do you think is winning that
war of nerves
well there's a short-term answer to that
and a long-term answer to that
I think in the the long term we have
never yet seen a successful
de-escalation or of this war and I fear
Eve in the long term
even if Aetna mosz ation were to work I
think the whole way in which was set out
by Nixon the way that he always
specified that withdrawal of the troops
did not apply to the troops on the
aircraft carriers and the troops in
Thailand and so on it does not mean
withdrawal from the war it just means
that he wants to win or at least to
maintain US presence by other means I
think it is see I start Corey I go all
the way back to 1959 and I talk about
what were then not military operations
but essentially in covert intelligence
activities and I think it's very
important to go that far back and look
at those because that is a situation
where you did not have the military in
the scene you only had the intelligence
plus Air America in the scene and that
is possibly what we might have in 73-74
if Nixon wins the election and I think
it will it will represent a continuation
of the American presence by other means
I'm not at all sanguine about the
ability to get the United States out of
Vietnam and I want to remind everyone
that it means more than getting the
troops out it means more than getting
the planes out it means that we're no
longer going to try and arrange cooze
topple governments and and and push
people around the way we have been doing
for over 20 years it's the situation
that comes to my mind is the situation
of the French and Algeria where the
fight between the gaulle and the
right-wing military was very severe and
that and now i'm startled all together
unrelated may i say all right well maybe
you should say some more about that in a
second but but at times it threatened
the the stability of the central
government in France itself yes and the
jockeying from the gauls point of view
in order to disengage from algeria was
was very extreme now I don't mean to
imply that therefore I think Nixon is
the de Gaulle I obviously I don't think
that but it seems to me that
there is evidence of a great deal of
jockeying in order simply to affect the
withdrawal of ground troops right and my
temptation knowing much less than you do
about this is to see for instance the
promotion of Abrams
to the Joint Chiefs of Staff as an
attempt by Nixon to solidify the troop
withdrawal position inside the Joint
Chiefs who have been I think on the
Lavelle side of this controversy do you
think that's a reason I think that I
know the very sensible word you've put
in at this point and of course no
analogy is perfect in history but I
think the compasses just knew raised
about comparing the the predicament of
Nixon to the predicament of Duvall is is
very apt one and and one which should
indeed be thought about and of course
the the trouble would to go ahead with
his generals and with the secret army
which emerged ultimately we should think
about all of that it's it's not easy I
think for most Americans to think of
their domestic history in terms of such
you know it we've become in accustomed
over the last decade to think of very
insidious things going on in in
Indochina I think most of us still have
this feeling it can't happen here you
know I mean because what we see when we
look around us is it's much more
attractive than that from unless we're
seemingly stable right yes but I'm I'm
not going to give you a sort of
three-minute summary of what's going to
happen to this country in the next year
but I do think that there are very
powerful forces opposed to even what
Nixon proposes to do which you might say
is a rather conservative kind of
withdrawal program and I think you're
absolutely right when Kissinger is
running into a lot of trouble I think
Nixon in 72 at any rate will be in a
position rather like Johnson in 64 where
he was not in a hurry to to do hawk-like
things and yet there were people who for
that very reason started chivvying and
pushing him harder than usual that is
usually the case the difference you're
suggesting or one of the principal
differences between Nixon and the Gaulle
is that the gauls long-range intent was
a very low-profile analogy
area and that Nixon's intent here his is
it you would argue is really to shift
the the mechanism of conduct in the war
in Southeast Asia is that no that's that
living this to a whole aspect of the
book that we haven't even talked about
which is economic interests I think the
goals long-term objective object was by
a political change of policy to maintain
French economic links with the natural
resources particularly the natural gas
of Algeria which we have just purchased
in their very large quantities right yes
where we don't have time for all of that
okay but I think that American
intelligence operations including and
Nixon's Vietnamization proposals in
Nixon Doctrine and so on also have to do
with US interest in long-term
relationship to the resources of
Indochina which increasingly it appears
despite many protestations to the
contrary it appears that the oil
industry suspect that it is a
considerable amount of oil in the
offshore areas of Indochina and that
there's one place where there that I
think they're just about ready to drill
which is in a offshore area which is
claimed by South Vietnam but which is
embarrassingly close to Cambodia in fact
that weren't for the the odd kinks in
the in the the boundary you would think
that they were a part of Cambodian
waters rather than Vietnamese waters and
that there some people have claimed that
the resources in that South China Sea
along the Sunda shelf may thunder it it
may sometime be an area which will be
comparable to the Persian Gulf it may in
fact be one of the largest untapped oil
reserves areas of the world and we know
that in a time of increasing talk about
you know the the need for long-term
planning for for for energy resources
that this this sort of area can be
extremely important I think that the
that one can make a military case for
having gone into Cambodia in 1970 but
one can also make a case that one wanted
at least to secure
those offshore waters for the the
further for the development of the oil
and I think it's quite easy to show that
to the people who had among if you look
starting at the start looking at the the
Vietnam Lobby in this country the peat
the private interests that have been
pushing for the same sort of thing that
these intelligence agents have been
pushing for we find the the oil lobby we
find a man called William Henderson in
1963 for example edits the book and
write a chapter in which he says in
effect we have to go beyond these covert
operations that we've been using in the
past we have to intervene we've always
been intervening he says but we have to
intervene more he was right there yes
but we must intervene more frankly and
directly than we have been intervening
before this was a message to the Kennedy
administration and so I think most
people know that they're very strong
there's a very high interface between
the oil industry and intelligence
operations overseas and I think that oil
interests have been clearly I think
being interested in Indochina at least
since about 1963 and in fact I haven't
checked this out yet but I noticed that
among the American Friends of Vietnam at
a conference in 1958 an organization
called offshore services was represented
way back then and there are a lot of
small not proven but but sort of hints
that that possibility of offshore oil
was people in the inside were aware of
it back before the second Vietnam war I
ever really began and that they like the
Pan Am officials who you talk about
although in the book and see it we were
involved in the war in this hair-trigger
relationship through intelligence yeah
able to determine what right what if
larger forces did okay well we're out of
time and I'm sorry about that it's been
very interesting talking to you I've
been talking to Peter Dale Scott about
his book the war conspiracy the secret
road
- the second Indochina war which is
about to be published by bobbs-merrill
it's been a pleasure and I hope you're
going to keep up this kind of research
in the future thanks very much